README.md, before:

# W65C02-Serial port bridge for Teensy 4.1

This project is a simple bridge between [W65C02 CPU](https://westerndesigncenter.com/wdc/documentation/w65c02s.pdf)
and a serial port, implemented for [Teensy 4.1](https://www.pjrc.com/store/teensy41.html) development board.

The main purpose of this project is to provide cycle-by-cycle debugging capabilities to W65C02, but it can serve
other purpose too, i.e.:

- __Comparative debugging for emulators__:
  You can run your 6502-family emulator in parallel with an actual CPU to compare the results
  in order to measure the accuracy of your emulator.
- __Emulated 8-bit computers with a physical processor__:
  You can implement an emulator of an 8-bit, 6502-based computer (i.e. C64), that will work
  (via this bridge) with a real CPU, while other components of the system (like RAM, ROM,
  video chip) remain emulated
  (something like [Neo 6502](https://www.olimex.com/Products/Retro-Computers/Neo6502/open-source-hardware)).

## Wiring

The W65C02 CPU is a 40-pin chip, with 37 data pins (2 pins are for
power/ground and pin 35 is unused). As Teensy board is equipped with 41 digital input/output pins,
and allows for serial connection via USB, it seems to be a perfect match for this project.
It is very simple to create this bridge on a breadboard.

Below there is a pinout diagram of the W65C02 CPU

```text
            +------------+
    VP/ <-- |  1      40 | <-- RES/
    RDY <-> |  2      39 | --> PHI2O
  PHI1O <-- |  3      38 | <-- SO/
   IRQ/ --> |  4      37 | <-- PHI2
    ML/ <-- |  5     @36 | <-- BE
   NMI/ --> |  6      35 | --- NC
   SYNC <-- |  7     *34 | --> RW/
    VDD --> |  8     *33 | <-> D0
     A0 <-- |  9*    *32 | <-> D1
     A1 <-- | 10*    *31 | <-> D2
     A2 <-- | 11*    *30 | <-> D3
     A3 <-- | 12*    *29 | <-> D4
     A4 <-- | 13*    *28 | <-> D5
     A5 <-- | 14*    *27 | <-> D6
     A6 <-- | 15*    *26 | <-> D7
     A7 <-- | 16*    *25 | --> A15
     A8 <-- | 17*    *24 | --> A14
     A9 <-- | 18*    *23 | --> A13
    A10 <-- | 19*    *22 | --> A12
    A11 <-- | 20*     21 | --> GND
            +------------+

    * - tri-state pin,   @ - async,  / - active on low
```

### Default configuration

The table below illustrates the default configuration of this project.
In order to adjust the pin mapping, modify the `PINS_MAP` macro definition in the
[configuration file](./configuration.h).

| Teensy pin | CPU pin | CPU pin name | ←  → | CPU Pin name  | CPU pin | Teensy pin |
| ---------- | ------- | ------------ | ---- | ------------- | ------- | ---------- |
|  2         | 1       | Vector pull  |      | Reset         | 40      | 18         |
| 21         | 2       | Ready        |      | PHI2O         | 39      |  1         |
|  3         | 3       | PHI1O        |      | Set overflow  | 38      | 17         |
| 20         | 4       | IRQ          |      | PHI2          | 37      | 16         |
|  4         | 5       | Memory lock  |      | Bus enable    | 36      | 15         |
| 19         | 6       | NMI          |      | No connection | 35      |            |
|  5         | 7       | SYNC         |      | Read/Write    | 34      | 14         |
| 3.3V       | 8       | VDD          |      | D0            | 33      | 40         |
|  6         | 9       | A0           |      | D1            | 32      | 39         |
|  7         | 10      | A1           |      | D2            | 31      | 38         |
|  8         | 11      | A2           |      | D3            | 30      | 37         |
|  9         | 12      | A3           |      | D4            | 29      | 36         |
| 10         | 13      | A4           |      | D5            | 28      | 35         |
| 11         | 14      | A5           |      | D6            | 27      | 34         |
| 12         | 15      | A6           |      | D7            | 26      | 33         |
| 24         | 16      | A7           |      | A15           | 25      | 29         |
| 25         | 17      | A8           |      | A14           | 24      | 30         |
| 26         | 18      | A9           |      | A13           | 23      | 31         |
| 27         | 19      | A10          |      | A12           | 22      | 32         |
| 28         | 20      | A11          |      | Ground        | 21      | GND        |

### Minimal configuration

In the minimalistic configuration the following CPU pins must be connected to the board:

- `A0-A15` - address bus (inputs)
- `D0-D7` - data bus (input or output)
- `RW` - read/write input; it informs whether the data bus is in read (high) or write (low) state
- `PHI2` - clock signal input
- `GND` - ground, should be connected with Teensy's ground pin
- `VDD` - power; should be connected with Teensy's 3.3V pin

In such configuration `RES`, `IRQ`, `NMI` and `BE` pins must be also connected to 3.3V
and `RDY` pin should be connected with power via resistor.

Please note that the `RES` (pin 40) must be kept low for at least two cycles on power on.
The bridge handles it programmatically, but if your intention is not to connect RST pin to
Teensy or to have a physical control over the reset state (i.e. in case of power failure),
then the best option is to connect the pin via
[DS1813](https://www.mouser.co.uk/datasheet/2/609/DS1813-3122044.pdf)

### Example

![Example wiring](./assets/board.jpg)
The photo demonstrates the complete configuration, as per table above (all CPU pins are
connected to Teensy, apart pin 35).
The CPU pin 8 (VDD) is connected via [decoupling capacitor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decoupling_capacitor).
Additionally there are some LEDs to indicate some of the signals.

### Warning

Incorrect connection may damage the CPU. Please take extra attention to the
correctness of your wiring, and double-check it before powering up your board.

## Compilation and execution

### With Arduino IDE and Teensyduino

1. Install [Arduino IDE](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software)
1. Install and configure [Teensyduino](https://www.pjrc.com/teensy/teensyduino.html)
1. Clone this project into your Arduino sketches folder (usually `~/Arduino/sketches`)
1. Click menu `Sketch / Compile` to compile
1. Click menu `Sketch / Upload` tu upload to Teensy board

### With Arduino CLI

Follow [this post](https://forum.pjrc.com/index.php?threads/arduino-cli-and-ide-now-released-teensy-supported.53548/page-5#post-299430) to see how to configure Arduino CLI with Teensy.

- to compile: `make`
- to upload `make upload`

Make sure that the port name in `Makefile` is the correct one. To find the port name execute
`arduino-cli board list`. You must have Teensy connected to your computer to have the port visible.

##### Install Arduino CLI and dependencies with Nix and Direnv

If you are not using Nix packages, then you don't know how much you miss in terms of convenience and reproducible dev environments - [start](https://nixos.org/download) today :-)

1. Clone the repo and cd project's directory
1. If you use [Direnv](https://direnv.net/), just execute `direnv allow`, otherwise type `nix-shell`
1. Wait until all dependencies download and configure
1. You can now use `make build` and `make upload`
1. I've added [`treefmt`](https://github.com/numtide/treefmt) to dependencies, so you can format the
   code after changes by executing `treefmt`

## Example

There is complete example program in the [examples folder](./examples), that demonstrates
how to execute 6502 binary with the bridge and RAM emulated on the host machine
(not on Teensy). See the [Readme file](.examples/README.md) for details.

## Working with other CPUs from the 6502 family

This project is meant to work specifically with W65C02 CPU. The main reason
is that W65C02 is static, that means it can be easily step-by-step cycled at any speed,
that is very useful in case of debugging. Some other CPUs, like C64's MOS6510, have
limitations of a minimum speed (~100kHz).

This bridge may still work with some CPUs from the 6502 family, but some adjustments
may need to be required, as the other processor may have different pin layout. Also,
the minimum speed requirement may be a blocker here, due to limited speed of the bridge itself
(see the section below).

## Speed limitations

The speed of the bridge is limited by the speed of the serial port. The bridge sends 40-bits of data
both directions for every single half-cycle (clock phase). In order to obtain the CPU speed of
1MHz, it would require the serial port operating at 160Mbit/s. Although the Teensy 4.1 is equipped
with high-speed USB 2.0 port, that - in theory - allows for 480Mbit/s, in reality the serial port
emulation uses a single USB channel only and there is an overhead related
to creation of USB packages. The current speed I've achieved in my tests is around
0.5Mbit/s. This is quite sufficient for any form of debugging and execution of test programs,
but definitely too slow in case of running any real-time applications.
In example starting the C64 Kernal via the bridge takes around 300 seconds.

I've created a [ticket](#8) for this issue. Contributors are welcome!


## References

- [W65C02 datasheet](https://westerndesigncenter.com/wdc/documentation/w65c02s.pdf)
- [Teensy 4.1](https://www.pjrc.com/store/teensy41.html)
- [6502 Primer: What do I do with the "mystery" pins](https://wilsonminesco.com/6502primer/MysteryPins.html)

Commit message:

explanation of the contents added to README

README.md, after:

# W65C02-Serial port bridge for Teensy 4.1

This project is a simple bridge between [W65C02 CPU](https://westerndesigncenter.com/wdc/documentation/w65c02s.pdf)
and a serial port, implemented for [Teensy 4.1](https://www.pjrc.com/store/teensy41.html) development board.

The main purpose of this project is to provide cycle-by-cycle debugging capabilities to W65C02, but it can serve
other purpose too, i.e.:

- __Comparative debugging for emulators__:
  You can run your 6502-family emulator in parallel with an actual CPU to compare the results
  in order to measure the accuracy of your emulator.
- __Emulated 8-bit computers with a physical processor__:
  You can implement an emulator of an 8-bit, 6502-based computer (i.e. C64), that will work
  (via this bridge) with a real CPU, while other components of the system (like RAM, ROM,
  video chip) remain emulated
  (something like [Neo 6502](https://www.olimex.com/Products/Retro-Computers/Neo6502/open-source-hardware)).

## Content of this repo

- C++ code for Teensy 4.1 that enables communication between serial port and the CPU.
- [Examples](./examples/) (in C++ and Rust) demonstrating how to use the Bridge from a program running on a
  computer.
- Explanation how to wire Teensy with W65C02 on a breadboard.
- Complete [PCB design and schematics](./pcb/) (with some extra features).

## Wiring

The W65C02 CPU is a 40-pin chip, with 37 data pins (2 pins are for
power/ground and pin 35 is unused). As Teensy board is equipped with 41 digital input/output pins,
and allows for serial connection via USB, it seems to be a perfect match for this project.
It is very simple to create this bridge on a breadboard.

Below there is a pinout diagram of the W65C02 CPU

```text
            +------------+
    VP/ <-- |  1      40 | <-- RES/
    RDY <-> |  2      39 | --> PHI2O
  PHI1O <-- |  3      38 | <-- SO/
   IRQ/ --> |  4      37 | <-- PHI2
    ML/ <-- |  5     @36 | <-- BE
   NMI/ --> |  6      35 | --- NC
   SYNC <-- |  7     *34 | --> RW/
    VDD --> |  8     *33 | <-> D0
     A0 <-- |  9*    *32 | <-> D1
     A1 <-- | 10*    *31 | <-> D2
     A2 <-- | 11*    *30 | <-> D3
     A3 <-- | 12*    *29 | <-> D4
     A4 <-- | 13*    *28 | <-> D5
     A5 <-- | 14*    *27 | <-> D6
     A6 <-- | 15*    *26 | <-> D7
     A7 <-- | 16*    *25 | --> A15
     A8 <-- | 17*    *24 | --> A14
     A9 <-- | 18*    *23 | --> A13
    A10 <-- | 19*    *22 | --> A12
    A11 <-- | 20*     21 | --> GND
            +------------+

    * - tri-state pin,   @ - async,  / - active on low
```

### Default configuration

The table below illustrates the default configuration of this project.
In order to adjust the pin mapping, modify the `PINS_MAP` macro definition in the
[configuration file](./configuration.h).

| Teensy pin | CPU pin | CPU pin name | ←  → | CPU Pin name  | CPU pin | Teensy pin |
| ---------- | ------- | ------------ | ---- | ------------- | ------- | ---------- |
|  2         | 1       | Vector pull  |      | Reset         | 40      | 18         |
| 21         | 2       | Ready        |      | PHI2O         | 39      |  1         |
|  3         | 3       | PHI1O        |      | Set overflow  | 38      | 17         |
| 20         | 4       | IRQ          |      | PHI2          | 37      | 16         |
|  4         | 5       | Memory lock  |      | Bus enable    | 36      | 15         |
| 19         | 6       | NMI          |      | No connection | 35      |            |
|  5         | 7       | SYNC         |      | Read/Write    | 34      | 14         |
| 3.3V       | 8       | VDD          |      | D0            | 33      | 40         |
|  6         | 9       | A0           |      | D1            | 32      | 39         |
|  7         | 10      | A1           |      | D2            | 31      | 38         |
|  8         | 11      | A2           |      | D3            | 30      | 37         |
|  9         | 12      | A3           |      | D4            | 29      | 36         |
| 10         | 13      | A4           |      | D5            | 28      | 35         |
| 11         | 14      | A5           |      | D6            | 27      | 34         |
| 12         | 15      | A6           |      | D7            | 26      | 33         |
| 24         | 16      | A7           |      | A15           | 25      | 29         |
| 25         | 17      | A8           |      | A14           | 24      | 30         |
| 26         | 18      | A9           |      | A13           | 23      | 31         |
| 27         | 19      | A10          |      | A12           | 22      | 32         |
| 28         | 20      | A11          |      | Ground        | 21      | GND        |

### Minimal configuration

In the minimalistic configuration the following CPU pins must be connected to the board:

- `A0-A15` - address bus (inputs)
- `D0-D7` - data bus (input or output)
- `RW` - read/write input; it informs whether the data bus is in read (high) or write (low) state
- `PHI2` - clock signal input
- `GND` - ground, should be connected with Teensy's ground pin
- `VDD` - power; should be connected with Teensy's 3.3V pin

In such configuration `RES`, `IRQ`, `NMI` and `BE` pins must be also connected to 3.3V
and `RDY` pin should be connected with power via resistor.

Please note that the `RES` (pin 40) must be kept low for at least two cycles on power on.
The bridge handles it programmatically, but if your intention is not to connect RST pin to
Teensy or to have a physical control over the reset state (i.e. in case of power failure),
then the best option is to connect the pin via
[DS1818 Econo Reset](https://www.mouser.co.uk/datasheet/2/609/DS1818-3122611.pdf)

### Example

![Example wiring](./assets/board.jpg)
The photo demonstrates the complete configuration, as per table above (all CPU pins are
connected to Teensy, apart pin 35).
The CPU pin 8 (VDD) is connected via [decoupling capacitor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decoupling_capacitor).
Additionally, there are some LEDs to indicate some of the signals.

### Warning

Incorrect connection may damage the CPU. Please take extra attention to the
correctness of your wiring, and double-check it before powering up your board.

## Compilation and execution

### With Arduino IDE and Teensyduino

1. Install [Arduino IDE](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software)
1. Install and configure [Teensyduino](https://www.pjrc.com/teensy/teensyduino.html)
1. Clone this project into your Arduino sketches folder (usually `~/Arduino/sketches`)
1. Click menu `Sketch / Compile` to compile
1. Click menu `Sketch / Upload` tu upload to Teensy board

### With Arduino CLI

Follow [this post](https://forum.pjrc.com/index.php?threads/arduino-cli-and-ide-now-released-teensy-supported.53548/page-5#post-299430) to see how to configure Arduino CLI with Teensy.

- to compile: `make`
- to upload `make upload`

Make sure that the port name in `Makefile` is the correct one. To find the port name execute
`arduino-cli board list`. You must have Teensy connected to your computer to have the port visible.

##### Install Arduino CLI and dependencies with Nix and Direnv

If you are not using Nix packages, then you don't know how much you miss in terms of convenience and reproducible dev environments - [start](https://nixos.org/download) today :-)

1. Clone the repo and cd project's directory
1. If you use [Direnv](https://direnv.net/), just execute `direnv allow`, otherwise type `nix-shell`
1. Wait until all dependencies download and configure
1. You can now use `make build` and `make upload`
1. I've added [`treefmt`](https://github.com/numtide/treefmt) to dependencies, so you can format the
   code after changes by executing `treefmt`

## Example

There is complete example program in the [examples folder](./examples), that demonstrates
how to execute 6502 binary with the bridge and RAM emulated on the host machine
(not on Teensy). See the [Readme file](.examples/README.md) for details.

## Working with other CPUs from the 6502 family

This project is meant to work specifically with W65C02 CPU. The main reason
is that W65C02 is static, that means it can be easily step-by-step cycled at any speed,
that is very useful in case of debugging. Some other CPUs, like C64's MOS6510, have
limitations of a minimum speed (~100kHz).

This bridge may still work with some CPUs from the 6502 family, but some adjustments
may need to be required, as the other processor may have different pin layout. Also,
the minimum speed requirement may be a blocker here, due to limited speed of the bridge itself
(see the section below).

## Speed limitations

The speed of the bridge is limited by the speed of the serial port. The bridge sends 40-bits of data
both directions for every single half-cycle (clock phase). In order to obtain the CPU speed of
1MHz, it would require the serial port operating at 160Mbit/s. Although the Teensy 4.1 is equipped
with high-speed USB 2.0 port, that - in theory - allows for 480Mbit/s, in reality the serial port
emulation uses a single USB channel only and there is an overhead related
to creation of USB packages. The current speed I've achieved in my tests is around
0.5Mbit/s. This is quite sufficient for any form of debugging and execution of test programs,
but definitely too slow in case of running any real-time applications.
In example starting the C64 Kernal via the bridge takes around 300 seconds.

I've created a [ticket](#8) for this issue. Contributors are welcome!


## References

- [W65C02 datasheet](https://westerndesigncenter.com/wdc/documentation/w65c02s.pdf)
- [Teensy 4.1](https://www.pjrc.com/store/teensy41.html)
- [6502 Primer: What do I do with the "mystery" pins](https://wilsonminesco.com/6502primer/MysteryPins.html)
